---
title: Accepting the limits of science
summary: The only things physics can tell us is that whenever we have A we also have B
category: Philosophy of science
tags: [Philosophy of science]
draft: true
---

I think there is somewhat a mental disconnect between what physics, or science more in general, can tell us about the universe and what people want it to be able to tell us. From philosophers that want to reach metaphysical conclusions on the nature of reality, to physicists that want to give an account of space and time at a fundamental level. Since mere experimentation will not be able to give those answers, some people ``push the boundaries of science,'' meaning that they try to apply it beyond its capabilities. And this muddles the waters: if science can talk about infinite worlds that are not experimentally accessible, why shouldn't it talk about a creator that directs evolution? Since I don't like my peas and my carrot to touch, let's talk about what science is, and what it can and cannot do.

Let us first get one thing straight: not all facts are scientific facts. "Integrals are anti-derivatives" is a fact but not a scientific fact. It is a provable statement, not a testable statement.  "Napoleon lost at Waterloo" is a fact, but is not a scientific fact. Napolean is one-of-a-kind irreproducible samples. There is no prediction we make about Napoleon. "x86 processors are little-endians" is a fact, but is not a scientific fact. It is just the technical decision that was mode in that architactures. Math, history, engineering, music, many important disciplines are not science, and it would be absolutely ludicrous to treat them otherwise. You don't make an experiment to see whether integrals are anti-derivatives, whether Napoleon lost at Waterloo or whether x86 processors are little-endians. You write a proof, you consult trusted sources or you read a manual. Somehow "not being scientific" has become an insults. It is not.

Science is about what can be tested experimentally in a reproducible way. Physics in particular is about simple systems that can be studied and described independently from the rest. For example, whenever we act on an object with a constant force, it will exhibit a constant acceleration in the same direction; at a given temperature, increasing the pressure of a gas will decrease its volume and so on. This allows us to build a body of knowledge about the world that anybody can be certain about, because anyone can (in principle) test it by oneself. However, this comes with a limitation: the explanation is the experimental data. Even when we construct mechanistic explanations (e.g. heat is the chaotic vibration of molecules, many peculiar properties of water are due to its hydrogen bonds) which explain higher constructs in terms of more fundamental ones, the latter have to be taken as is. Why are there electrons? Because that's what we see experimentally.

This is something that is also true for math or any other system of thought: the primitives are primitives; they cannot be explained. If one tries to explain the axiom, he will end up with another set of primitives. Peronally, I never had problems accepting these types of limitations. The game is simply to find a good set of starting points. They should be clear, intuitive and meaningful. And they should be powerful, in the sense that a lot can be derived from little. They should decouple well the problem at hand. That is as much as we can ask. Hense, the Assumptions of Physics project.

However, I am finding that quite a few people do not seem satisfied with this. They want to know more. Why are there these particular particles with these particular masses? Why is there a universe? Why are there four forces? Ultimately, physics cannot answer any of these questions without opening others. "All fources are really one force!" "But why is there only one force?". When I point this out, sometimes I get an accusing question: how could I find it satisfying?

I do not have to find it satisfying: it is what it is. Trying to use science for this more open ended question only gives empy answers, like "the vacuum is unstable and it will generate universes." You are just stringing together some scientific sounding jargon: you cannot possibly know that, and you cannot test it. Science is a great hammer, but not everything is a nail. We have better tools for truly fundamental question about existence and about purpose: philosophy and religion. Learn hot wo use them.