---
title: On the usefulness of philosophy of physics
summary: How some physicists get the wrong impression and what I wished philosophers discussed
category: Philosophy of Physics
tags: [Philosophy of Physics]
draft: true
---

When I tell other physicists that I routinely engage with philosophers of physics, quite a few, particularly experimentalists, ask with suspicion, "and you find that useful?" Most of the time I do... but it makes it hard to make that point when some philosophers of physics go out and say that, like ornithologists are not trying to be useful to birds, philosophers of physics are not trying to be useful to physicists. So, let me share some thoughts based on my firsthand experience with both physicists and philosophers.

First of all, birds do not define what a bird is: ornithologists do. Philosophers of physics do not define what physics is: physicists do. Ergo, if a philosopher is discussing the philosophy of something that a physicist does not recognize as physics, I am very, very sorry, but that philosopher may be doing really great philosophy, but it's not philosophy of *physics*. For example, physicists really care about experiments. If one starts talking about ontologies, hidden variables, parallel worlds or other things that, by definition, are not testable, many physicists, especially experimental ones, will understandably consider it a waste of time. In the same way, if a historian is discussing the history of something that a philosopher does not recognize as philosophy, like the life of Mozart, it wouldn't be history of *philosophy* and would face similar pushback from philosophers. One may say that this is only a verbal dispute... but also: words matter. 

While many philosophers of physics actually do philosophy of *physics*, and they often have a broader (though more shallow) knowledge than physicists, which is what I find useful, a small but loud set of philosophers of science seem to be on a quest to tell physicists how to do *real* physics. And if you are a standard physicist, it only takes one philosopher of physics like this to discredit the whole category. At a philosophy retreat, while engaging with the graduate students, one came out and said that, in the end, physicists do not know anything about the foundations of physics. I thought it was a hyperbole. So, I pressed: I just came from a physics conference about foundations, where people reported experimental results on weak measurement, quantum teleportation... are you telling me that none of them knew anything about the foundations of physics? Yes, he confirmed. On a couple of occasions, when I stated that I want all my results to be independent of interpretation, independent of ontology, so that I only say things that all physicists must say about quantum mechanics, some philosophers objected that I should not do that. Puzzled, I reassured them that I am not saying that they should not have their own ontology, or that there is no value in further interpretations. But they really meant that I should not pursue that program. That it was, in some sense, bad for science.

I want to stress at this point: I published in philosophy of science journals. If all you got is "philosophy of science bad"... well, you are either in bad faith or your neurons are switched off. The point is that the skepticism by physicists towards philosophy of physics is, in my experience, at least partly justified. My bad experiences were more than counterbalanced by the good experiences from our very own philosophy of science department at the University of Michigan, and other friends I made along the way. But most physicists will not have that experience.

Most physicists, if time allows, do like to have deeper conversations about their practice. But that has to be grounded within the intuition said practice gave them. For example, to the vast majority of physicists, physical theories are just models that, if you know when and how to apply them correctly, are useful. You can understand what the important features of a system are and make calculations. This is why most physicists don't care that much about things like mathematical rigor: knowing when and how to apply the model is not rigorous anyway. I recall a student, after attending a philosophy of physics seminar, exclaiming, half confused and half surprised, "they think these models are real!" I can imagine a philosopher taking that sentence literally and thinking about scientific realism... it just means "the map is not the territory!"

The saddest thing to me is that there are indeed many philosophical issues at the foundations of physics that need to be clarified... but none of them are typically discussed by philosophers of physics. For example, in our project we have seen that the requirements to be able to do physics drive most of the mathematical apparatus. Requiring statements to be associated with tests leads to topologies and sigma algebras, core mathematical structures that permeate all of physics. Ironically, a philosopher, Kevin Kelly, talked about this decades ago... so why did I have to rediscover that basic idea? Why are discussions about ontology so prevalent among philosophers of physics, and not discussions about how epistemological constraints limit the structure of physical theories? That would be *extremely* more useful and, to me, much more in line with what physics is.

It's many years now that I have been looking for philosophers that are trying to argue things that are close to the thing I need, so that our project has a sturdier philosophical foundation. I'd be able to give them many examples and counterexamples to broaden their arguments. Useful to each other, the whole greater than the parts. I can only hope.
