---
title: The impossibility of physical finitism
summary: Physics requires reproducibility and reproducibility requires potential infinity, therefore physical theories requires infinity
category: Foundations of physics
tags: [Foundations of physics, Philosoophy of physics, Infinity]
draft: true
---

In philosophy of mathematics, finitism is the view that only finite objects (e.g. sets with finitely many elements) are truly valid objects. Some versions of physical finitism are very popular in the foundations of physics as well. They may justify working only on finite-dimensional quantum objects because "in the end, all measurements are finite," or that "we can only extract finite information." They may instinctively think that space-time is "discrete," and the continuum approximation is just due to the large number of elements. In my experience, most people seem to hold this view more as a preconceived belief than a well thought out stance. "What else could it be?" I am often asked. This is fairly typical for such views on the foundations of physics... and it is also typical that they do not work.

Physical finitism may stem from assuming that "physics describes the universe as it is" and that "the universe is knowable." Since everything we can know is finite and the universe is in principle knowable, then it must be finite. It may be very large, so in practice we cannot know it... but it's a matter of degree. Since physics describes the universe, and the universe is finite, then physics should describe finite objects. QED! However, the premise is wrong: physics does not describe the universe as it is, but only repeatedly testable features of the universe.

Since physics requires empirical reproducibility, it can only describe relationships between outputs of preparation procedures and outputs of measurement procedures. That is, the object of physics is not "the universe as it is," but the stream of consistently prepared systems and consistently calibrated measurement devices. Since reproducibility requires the ability to always "test one more time," these streams are infinite collections: they are statistical ensembles. You may object: but surely the infinite collection cannot be realized in practice! Naturally, it can't. Yet, physics is about those infinite collections. Physics must be about relationships between infinite objects, even though all measurements are finite.

You may say, like many philosophers I talk to do, that you care about the universe as it is: you care about the elements of those infinite collections. So, for example, you posit hidden variables and the ensembles are determined by the averages of those variables. The hidden variable can be discrete even if the averages are continuous. This may be true, but the point is that physics is about the stream, not the instances. Entropy, which is a physically measurable quantity, characterizes the variability of the stream and is not a property of an instance of the stream. The uncertainty principle in quantum mechanics, for example, is due to the inability to create a stream of preparations for a single degree of freedom with a variability below what is allowed by the lower bound on the entropy. Regardless of whether the instances are finite objects, the above empirical facts will always be about infinite objects.

Understanding what objects are physically valid and which aren't is crucial to making progress in the foundations of physics. However, physics does not deal with a "snapshot" of the universe, but rather with what can be empirically reproduced. These are the objects that theoretical physics, that our models, deal with. Whether the universe is finite or not, physics must be described in terms of infinite sequences of preparations and measurements... Just one more test!