---
title: The foundations of physics should be (are) boring
summary: Solving exciting problems will not give us solid foundations for physics
category: Foundations of physics
tags: [Foundations of physics]
draft: true
---

We seem to be in an era where scientific results are measured by how "exciting" they are. Our paper on the [Geometric and physical interpretation of the action principle](https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.06428) was rejected without review because it didn't "excite the immediate interest" of researcher. From my point of view, most research in the foundations of physics is not going to be exciting at all to most people. After all, how many times, during the tour of a building, were you shown how well the concrete was poured or how deep the piling foundations go?

Let's first ask ourselves a question: when is a question foundational to a field? For example, we currently do not have a way to calculate, from first principles, which isotopes are stable and which aren't. The data we have comes from experiment. Does this problem qualify as a foundational question? Well, if you study isotopes, yes. If you are working on quantum information, however, it will probably not affect anything. It is not a foundational question for the whole of physics. Now consider all those oustanding problems that excite people and are lumped into the term "foundations of physics": dark matter, quantum gravity, theories of everything ... and better yet if they connect to other problems, like consciousness, the origin of the universe and so on. Are these fundamental for all of physics? Would answering these question clarify and give better tools to all physicists? Let's see, do we need to know what dark matter is to describe the behaviour of light? No. Do we need to know the origin of the universe to describe the orbits of the solar system? No. Most physics can be done, and is done, in the same way regardles of whether we will ever able to solve those problems. So, dark matter or quantum gravity may be at the foundations of cosmology, but not the whole of physics.

The core issue is that a small community of physicists that are working on these topics somehow decided that those are the most interesting problems in physics and, I really do not know how, seem to have convinced the rest of the community. How is solving the problem of dark matter more interesting or more important then, say, studying the structure of the proton? I mean, the proton, together with the neutron, gives mass to everything we interact with, and its charge is what determines the electromagnetic properties of all the nuclei, and therefore of all matter. Wouldn't figuring out how the proton works be a lot more important than, say, knowing whether the Higgs exists or how neutrino oscillation works? Somehow, in the mind of those physicists, once you have the basic laws, once you have the Lagrangian, you are done. Well, THEY are done because that's the only thing they are intersted in. In reality, while we do have the Lagrangian that should describe the proton and the nuclei, we can't really do much with it. Most physics is in finding the actual consequences of the basic laws. It seems to me that the term "foundations of physics" has been hijacked to mean "what people in high energy physics or cosmology like," with a bone thrown in to philosophers who agree.

It stand to reason that the foundations of physics should be something that affects all people that do physics. It should provide tools and inights that are useful to the vast majority of physicists. It should be something that you'd see taught in some fashion to all physics students because is a generally useful tool or a good way of abstracting physical problems. Since many physicists work with theories that are well established, it must follow that it is mainly a better reorganization of the current knowledge. It is, for example, provide a general mathematical notion for state so that we can generalize theorems and structures that are present, in different forms, in all physical theories. It is giving an account to what energy, entropy, momentum, mass and all other quantities that are in all physical theories are. And this account must make sense in EVERY theory in the same way, or it is not foundational. Every model must stand conceptually on its own premises. I realize that most people find this boring, and that's fine. Important and exciting are not the same things.

Since Lagrangians are used in every physical theory we have, having a clear geometric and physical interpretation of what they describe seems to me a foundational question. It is not exciting in the sense that it will not directly lead to new physics. It helps you better understand, and teach, the current theories. In this sense, it is boring. Like going through mathematical definitions to see whether they are physically grounded or not is boring to most people. But it is this increased basic understanding that puts people in the position to find new, and more exciting, results. Yet, there is very little space in the physics community to do this work. I can't tell you whether the problem is self-selection, group-think, funding, education... What I can tell you that this work is long overdue, and why the foundations of physics are way behind with respect to the foundations of mathematics, computer science and many other fields.
